Add how-to on enabling LoadBalancer services on cloudscale.ch (#137)
appuio/openshift4-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/cloudscale/enable-loadbalancer-service.adoc

= Enable `LoadBalancer` serivces on cloudscale.ch

[abstract]
--
Steps to enable `LoadBalancer` serivces on an OpenShift 4 cluster from https://cloudscale.ch[cloudscale.ch].
--

[NOTE]
--
- In the future, this procedure will be mostly automated
--

== Starting situation

> * You already have a OpenShift 4 cluster on cloudscale.ch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You already have an OpenShift 4 cluster on cloudscale.ch
```

* You have admin-level access to the cluster
* The cluster is using https://cilium.io[Cilium] as the network plugin
* You want to enable LoadBalancer services

== Prerequisites

* `ssh`
* `curl`
* `kubectl`
* `yq` https://mikefarah.gitbook.io/yq[yq YAML processor] (version 4 or higher)
* `whois`

== Prepare IP range

. Get a suitable public IP range.
You can find all IP ranges owned by VSHN
+
[source,console]
----
whois -i mnt-by MNT-VSHN -T inetnum -r
----
Please coordinate with other VSHNeers before using an IP range.

. Update RIPE DB to reflect the new usage of the IP range.

> . Create a ticket at cloudscale.ch to make the range available as a Floating Network in the project of the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a ticket with cloudscale.ch to make the range available as a Floating Network in the project of the cluster.
```

[source,console]
----
export CLUSTER_ID="c-cold-bush-7254"
export IP_RANGE="203.0.113.128/25"

mkdir -p lbaas/${CLUSTER_ID}
touch lbaas/${CLUSTER_ID}/lb.yaml
yq eval -i '."profile_openshift4_gateway::loadbalancer_ip_address_pools" += [${IP_RANGE}]' lbaas/${CLUSTER_ID}/lb.yaml

git commit -a -m "Add loadbalancer IP range ${IP_RANGE} to ${CLUSTER_ID}"
git push
----
 

=== Setup BGP speaker

The following steps need to be done manually on both loadbalancer VMs

. Install FRR
+
[source,console]
----
apt install frr
----

. Enable bgp by setting `bgpd=yes` in `/etc/frr/daemon`
+
[source]
----
...
bgpd=yes
ospfd=no
ospf6d=no
ripd=no
ripngd=no
...
----

. Restart FRR
+
[source,console]
----
systemctl restart frr
----
  
. Configure FRR
+
Enter the FRR shell with
+
[source,console]
----
vtysh
----
+
Configure BGP neighbors
+
[source]
----
conf t
router bgp 64512
  neighbor <ip-infra-node-0> remote-as 64512 <1>
  neighbor <ip-infra-node-1> remote-as 64512
  neighbor <ip-infra-node-2> remote-as 64512
  end
write <2>
----
<1> You can add any of the cluster node IPs.
We propose to peer with each of the infrastructure nodes.
<2> You need to write the configuration to persist 

> == Configure Cilium

Author: As the story for the Cilium component is in the next sprint, I don't think it's worth the effort.

> == Configure Cilium

Reviewer 2: I see that the same, no need to have an in-between solution right now.

. Add a ConfigMap called `bgp-config` in the namespace `cilium`.
This ConfigMap contains https://metallb.universe.tf/usage/#bgp[MetalLB] configuration.
+
Here's an example ConfigMap.
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: bgp-config
  namespace: kube-system
data:
  config.yaml: |
    peers:
      - peer-address: 10.0.0.1 <1>
        peer-asn: 64512
        my-asn: 64512
      - peer-address: 10.0.0.2 <1>
        peer-asn: 64512
        my-asn: 64512
    address-pools:
      - name: default
        protocol: bgp
        addresses:
          - 203.0.113.128/25 <2>
----
<1> IP of the loadbalancers
<2> Public IP range chosen

. Update the Cilium configuration to enable BGP.
Our Cilium setup is configured through the `CiliumConfig` CRD called `cilium` in namespace `cilium`.
The CRD contains helm values.

> Update the CRD `spec` with

Reviewer: Might be worth it to craft a `kubectl patch` which can be copy-pasted for this step

Author: Again I don't know if it makes sense to improve this, as this should be managed by the Cilium component very soon.

--

== Troubleshoot

=== Check BGP peering

You can check if the BGP peering was successful, by connecting to the loadbalancer VMs.

. Enter the FRR shell with
+
[source,console]
----
vtysh
----

. Show BGP summary.
+
[source]
----
show bgp summary
----
+
This should show you something similar to
+
[source]
----
BGP router identifier XXXX, local AS number 64512 vrf-id 0
BGP table version 6
RIB entries 5, using 920 bytes of memory
Peers 3, using 61 KiB of memory

Neighbor        V         AS MsgRcvd MsgSent   TblVer  InQ OutQ  Up/Down State/PfxRcd
172.18.200.137  4      64512   11120   11117        0    0    0 3d20h37m            3
172.18.200.157  4      64512   11120   11117        0    0    0 3d20h37m            3
172.18.200.218  4      64512   11119   11116        0    0    0 3d20h37m            3

Total number of neighbors 3
----

. Show available routes 
+
[source]
----
show ip route
----
+
This should include routes for the created LoadBalancer service.

If these checks look correct, the BGP setup works as expected.
If you still can't connect to the service, re-check the network policies and check if the Floating Network is assigned correctly.

> If the neighbors or routes don't show up correctly, follow the other troubleshooting steps.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the neighbors or routes don't show up correctly, follow the other troubleshooting steps.
``

=== Check BGP announcements 

Next, check if Cilium sends out BGP announcements and whether they arrive at the loadbalancer VMs.

. Check if Cilium sends out BGP announcements.
In one of the Cilium pods run
+
[source,console]
----
tcpdump -n -i any tcp port 179
----
+
If Cilium sends out announcements to the correct IPs, it's most likely setup correctly.
If it doesn't, there is an issue with Cilium.

> One thing to consider it, that Cilium doesn't pick up updates of the `bgp-config` ConfigMap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One thing to consider is that Cilium doesn't automatically pick up updates of the `bgp-config` ConfigMap.
```

> Make sure to restart the Cilium Pods it you change the configuration.

Reviewer: Which Cilium pods? Just the DaemonSet pods?

```suggestion
Make sure to restart the Cilium pods it you change the configuration.
```

. Check if any BGP announcements arrive and are accepted.
On one of the loadbalancer VMs run
+
[source,console]
----
tcpdump -n -i any tcp port 179
----
+
There should be packets coming in from the cluster nodes and they should be answered.

.. If no packets come in, check the connection between the cluster nodes and the loadbalancer VM.

> .. If packets come in but aren't answered the issue might be the firewall setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. If packets come in but aren't answered, the issue might be the firewall setup.
```

> = Enable `LoadBalancer` serivces on cloudscale.ch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
= Enable `LoadBalancer` services on cloudscale.ch
```

[abstract]
--

> Steps to enable `LoadBalancer` serivces on an OpenShift 4 cluster on https://cloudscale.ch[cloudscale.ch].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Steps to enable `LoadBalancer` services on an OpenShift 4 cluster on https://cloudscale.ch[cloudscale.ch].
```

--

[NOTE]
--

> - In the future, this procedure will be mostly automated

Reviewer 2: Remove that, doesn't add any value and when it gets automated, the documentation will get updated as well.

--

== Starting situation

* You already have an OpenShift 4 cluster on cloudscale.ch
* You have admin-level access to the cluster
* The cluster is using https://cilium.io[Cilium] as the network plugin
* You want to enable LoadBalancer services

== Prerequisites

* `ssh`
* `curl`
* `kubectl`
* `yq` https://mikefarah.gitbook.io/yq[yq YAML processor] (version 4 or higher)
* `whois`

== Prepare IP range

. Get a suitable public IP range.
You can find all IP ranges owned by VSHN
+
[source,console]
----
whois -i mnt-by MNT-VSHN -T inetnum -r
----

> Please coordinate with other VSHNeers before using an IP range.

Reviewer 2: Who is "other VSHNeers"? We might need to be more specific here.

Author: The thing is: I'm not sure. It doesn't seem like there is really someone that feels responsible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please coordinate with VSHN Corporate IT before using an IP range.
```

> . Update RIPE DB to reflect the new usage of the IP range.

Reviewer 2: How to do that? We should say here what this actually means.

. Enter the FRR shell with
+
[source,console]
----
vtysh
----

. Show BGP summary.
+
[source]
----
show bgp summary
----
+
This should show you something similar to
+
[source]
----
BGP router identifier XXXX, local AS number 64512 vrf-id 0
BGP table version 6
RIB entries 5, using 920 bytes of memory
Peers 3, using 61 KiB of memory

Neighbor        V         AS MsgRcvd MsgSent   TblVer  InQ OutQ  Up/Down State/PfxRcd
172.18.200.137  4      64512   11120   11117        0    0    0 3d20h37m            3
172.18.200.157  4      64512   11120   11117        0    0    0 3d20h37m            3
172.18.200.218  4      64512   11119   11116        0    0    0 3d20h37m            3

Total number of neighbors 3
----

. Show available routes 
+
[source]
----
show ip route
----
+
This should include routes for the created LoadBalancer service.

If these checks look correct, the BGP setup works as expected.
If you still can't connect to the service, re-check the network policies and check if the Floating Network is assigned correctly.

If the neighbors or routes don't show up correctly, follow the other troubleshooting steps.

> ``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```
